I would argue the athletes approach is
better than the bodybuilder's approach
because they still have energy. Whereas
the bodybuilders that are doing this
high volume, they can't even get off the
couch.
[music]
Hi, my name is John Jish. I am a doctor
of biomedical engineering. Today we're
going to discuss bodybuilding
and what's wrong with it. Now being a
biomedical engineer means I'm not a
sports scientist. So I have very few
biases and I come in and and look at the
whole body of literature in sports
performance and in bodybuilding. And I
have drawn some different conclusions
than others have. Not necessarily
drastically different, more nuanced, but
I think there's there's some better
answers out there than you're being
given by the usual suspects. Some of the
uh the sports science guys, I think
they're they're reading their own press
releases or reading their own research
and not really looking at other things
in the same way and they might be a
little lost. Now, the people that I
typically mention are on the right track
and very objective
about what they're analyzing. Everybody
who I don't mention, I either don't know
about them or
I don't mention them because what
they're saying is either lousy advice or
just straight up wrong. So the first
issue here is
when you look at all of the sports
performance literature,
my hesitation when looking at
hypertrophy research is when we when we
look at it, the measurements of how
we're coming to these conclusions
do not discern between
two types of muscle growth. So
cycloplasmic versus myophibbral
sarcoplasmic can come on quick,
especially with beginner lifters. What
ends up happening is somebody will do a
study and even with a trained athlete,
they'll give them a higher volume than
they've been normally doing. So they
basically have a bigger pump and they
collect more metabolites within the
musculature and ultimately more ATP,
glycogen, and creatine phosphate.
It creates the illusion that
there's growth that happens faster
because of this more volume. That's not
that's not the illusion part. That's
real. The idea is that this happens in
perpetuity and it profoundly does not.
How do athletes train? This is the
better the better way to look at it.
Like the uh the smartest people in
sports performance, they're not on
YouTube. they're working with the NFL or
or mixed martial arts. And I have been
so lucky to uh now now I'm working with
Westside Barbell and those are the two
sports that we interact most with and we
help out the most. I I say we I'm kind
of along for the ride because I'm
providing the equipment that Westside
barbell coaches are applying with these
other athletes and most importantly
educating the strength and conditioning
professionals that deal with the NFL
teams and uh the mixed martial art
athletes and they they have all kinds of
other athletes too, but th those are
those are industrywide. Uh, Westside
Barbell is known for really developing
the best athletes for the most part
don't split the body up. Like you don't
you don't ever see like an MMA fighter
that's like, "Yeah, I'm doing back and
shoulders today." Like what? No. No.
It's full body workouts. Now, you might
do a full body workout four days a week
with resistance
and then go do your MMA training or do
drills for football. Because when you're
an athlete, you've got to save some
energy to be on the field or to be in
the ring or in the pit if you're a
grappler. You need all of these things
to be stimulating and driving you in the
right direction while at the same time
not devastating you so you can still
perform. Now, I would argue the athletes
approach is better than the
bodybuilder's approach because they
still have energy whereas the
bodybuilders that are doing this high
volume, they can't even get off the
couch. So, they're just devastated,
exhausted all the time if they're
training with any sort of relevant
intensity. And if they're not training
with any sort of relevant intensity,
then they're just wasting their time. Or
maybe they're trying to let the drugs do
the work, which is how this set of
recommendations showed up in the first
place because the links to these high
volumes is completely associated with
drug cycles. But a lot of researchers
just threw the drug part away and
they're trying to build these volume
pyramids in or just high volume
recommendations in with drug-free people
and it's not working and uh it's never
worked. So that's it's easier to see
especially when
you look at the division between
strength and size. the typical
there was just a meta analysis fairly
recently uh that was talking about the
optimal volumes uh for like they're
looking at minimum dose response or just
what's the response over groups of
individuals that do more versus less
sets and train with higher intensity. So
for strength it's two sets per workout
gives you sort of the maximum return for
your investment. Whereas for muscle
growth for hypertrophy they say 12 sets
per workout.
Well,
over time and this is very well
established in the research and you can
even see on stronger by science. One of
the most exhaustive
narrative
uh analyses of strength versus size is
done there. And the ultimate conclusion
is the more developed you become,
strength and size become the same exact
subject. Uh the stronger you are, the
bigger you are. And for example, you'll
never see a weak bodybuilder, even a
natural bodybuilder, if they have a
significant amount of muscle, they are
strong. So this idea that the pump is
going to carry you,
no, not saying anything negative about
the pump, but just chasing it
specifically,
nah, that's that's not what the data
says. You you want to be as strong as
possible. Chasing strength is
always been my position and I believe it
is the shortest path to the greatest
result, the most maximized result and
that's how all the sports do it. And if
you look at how much money for example
is in the NFL,
who do you think is getting the better
coaching? Is it the NFL which you total
all the teams and budgets it's, you
know, billions of dollars? or is it
bodybuilding which is instead of
billions of dollars just dollars or
thousands of dollars maybe uh it's not a
big industry and also the NFL and mixed
martial arts athletes are drug tested
now do they ever do
performance-enhancing drugs and get away
with it maybe usually a handful of
people a year get caught so that shows
you they test and that shows you the
majority of them are clean So the ones
that aren't clean, I mean, they get
caught. The way the testing works now is
anything that's an anomaly in your blood
work equals ban. So, uh, nobody's
getting away with anything anymore. I I
just it it's very important to point
this out because these are all the
reasons that bodybuilding type training
has gone in the direction it has gone.
And I believe it's just largely a
distraction from real progress. And then
maybe the most blistering thing of all
is about a year ago there was a study
that showed that 50 plus sets
per week per body part was the
recommendation. That was the summary.
That's not what the study found. What
the study found was they had athletes
training for two weeks, only two weeks,
doing
I think it was 52 sets per week. And
they were of all the groups that were
tested, they were the ones that grew the
most muscle. But if you're doing 50 sets
per body part per week, you're doing 400
sets per week. There's no way you're
training with any sort of intensity.
That is just such a ridiculous
recommendation. Uh you just won't even
make it through that.
if you're training with any sort of
intensity at all. So, I just caution
everyone, follow those who talk about
high intensity, who talk about
maximizing your strength.
Going in that direction is going to give
you the greatest result in the shortest
period of time. I hope this helps. If
you want to tell me I'm wrong, please do
so in the comments. If you want to tell
me I'm right, also do that. Hope this
video helped. And if you have any really
good questions, it'll probably spark
another video. Thanks. If this video
helped you, I want you to subscribe and
follow. I'm going to put out videos on a
regular basis. I think they're going to
help a whole lot of people, especially
if you're one of those people that
doesn't just instantly grow from lifting
regular weights. We've got the answer
for you. [music]